In alcohol?
In alcohol.
Yeah.
And then we had, we got these tapes from the University of Texas.
They had authored them and we changed some of the content.
I went to John once and I said, you know, we have a tape on premature ejaculation.
And John said to me, is that a problem that students sometimes talk with you about?
And I said, yeah, students talk to us about sexual concerns, particularly in those days because the health center was much more conservative about birth control and all those things.
And we actually did get into, quote, plumbing.
We probably shouldn't have, but we did.
But John said, is that a student problem?
Is that something suitable?
I said, yeah, occasionally, not overwhelmingly, but occasionally.
He said, well, if that's a student problem, then we ought to address it.
And so that was very relieving.
Now, I also remember before the gay, lesbian, bisexual student group was recognized at the university, though, we did play the politically conservative role
take the position of calling it alternative lifestyles, and that's the way the group was advertised rather than gay, lesbian, bisexual.
It was a euphemism.
In hindsight, was that a prudent course?
Yeah, I think it was.
I really do.
It wasn't the most honest course, but from a transitory perspective, I think it was the right transitory thing to do.
As soon as that lawsuit was taken care of in Houston and all that, and that group was recognized, then we began labeling the group exactly what it was.
And that was very interesting because before that group was recognized, we had at least two gay lesbian groups running in the center every week.
As soon as they were recognized, it dropped off to none.
It just changed.
The students did not use us to the degree that they had.
There was something about the impact of finally, I guess they're being legitimatized.
When you said running, you mean coming to... We ran them.
One meeting, two groups, one time a week, yeah.
Running those groups, yeah.
Right.
So that was interesting.
I always remember, tangentially, John Koldis coming back from being spoken to by the federal district judge down in Houston, and we used to debate whether in loco parentis was alive or not, and we were all thinking, well, it was fairly dead, you know, and all that.
I remember John coming back and said the judge was very clear, Dr. Koldis, you are responsible for what that then 37,000 do and do not do, you know, and he said in loco parentis lives in the federal court.
As far as you were aware during the 80s, we'll say,
Were your professional colleagues on other campuses aware of the quality of the program here?
Yeah.
I think because I engaged in making a number of presentations at a variety of professional organizations and as more of our staff began doing the same thing, yeah, there's no question that our staff
in a very comparatively short period of time has just moved the reputation of A&M in our own little world, moved it up dramatically and rapidly.
And did you have, in terms of salaries and other funding, did you have a budget that was comparable to other institutions of our sort?
It was always reasonable.
We were probably always in salaries in the median.
But then we had the no state income tax, lower cost of living, you know, all those adjustments and that kind of thing.
And then in more recent years, we got a career ladder agreed to by the president and we have become extremely competitive long term.
We had a lot of hemorrhaging of, well,
In this business, in counseling psychology, a lot of people start out in college counseling centers and then go to teaching or private practice or business consulting.
So they use it as their first experiential base.
And so you get a lot of people staying for two, three, four years, and then they're gone.
With the career ladder, we have four gradations of psychologists with a 15% salary increase when they hit each grade.
and now we have stopped the hemorrhaging.
We have a number of long-term experienced staff.
Describe your style, manner, as the chief of this tribe.
How did you lead them?
What were your guidelines, your plans?
As you well know, PhDs are an interesting breed of cat.
And in the area of psychology, especially when they're all licensed by the state, each one of them think that they are capable of running the world and the universe.
And so I've always tried to be very professionally respectful of my colleagues.
much as I think you do in an academic department.
On the other hand, I have reminded them that we're really viewed as an administrative department, that I used to quote John Koldis who probably got it from someplace else, higher education is not a democracy.
I used to remind people that if one of them screwed up, it was me that was on the carpet for it.
I am responsible for you, you know, whether you agree with that or not, you know.
But I always started with a base of a collegial kind of way and also trying to get buy-in to what we were doing.
Now, I've been given feedback that I'm pretty good, though, at getting people, when they're not so crazy about doing something, to do it anyway.
But I probably am like Lyndon Johnson, come let us reason together, although I'm sure I don't have the hammer he had.
But I tend to use my power and my position as a last resort.
I will not invoke that unless I absolutely have to.
How often did you collect the whole team together to meet with them?
Oh, we have a staff meeting once a week.
Every week, yeah, once a week.
And if you were giving them a set of guidelines, what were the important do's and don'ts?
What was the professional staff?
Oh, number one is students are number one.
That's a constant reminder.
In fact, not only did I take our psychology interns to those student service finance committee meetings where they, because 86% of the budget and informally 90% of our budget comes from student fees.
And I really like that system because it made me every year go before 10 to 20 students and justify why we existed and what we were doing.
And I thought that was proper because they're paying the bills.
I'm sort of a consumer advocate kind of person of higher education.
And then I would also take older staff members who've been with me 8, 10 years who might begin to forget where the money is that's paying their salary and that.
It's important that they understand it's the kids and their families and loans.
And this is who you're working for.
So to me, students have always been number one.
Another thing is, honestly, frugality.
I mean, I wear a mantle of sometimes being somewhat cheap around here and frugal.
But I'm not really, because when I'm given a portion of budget, a merit salary pot, I use the last dollar.
and that kind of thing.
But we had a staff member here who runs our helpline, which is a great, it's a group of 40 or 50 students who come in here at 4 p.m.
They come in in pairs.
They're put through 50 hours of training to man telephone lines.
They come in 4 to 8, another two come in 8 to midnight, another two midnight to 4 a.m., another two 4 a.m.
to 8 a.m.
when we all come back.
And I remember getting a bill like 18 bucks worth of postage, and I said,
I said, Susan, what is this for?
And she said, well, I forgot to tell them about our dinner.
See, we pay them a dollar a month.
And I forgot to tell them about our dinner, so I just sent out all these notices.
And she said, but you know, she said, when you have a budget of over two million, you know, what's 18 or 20 bucks?
And I said to her, Susan, you just said the wrong thing to the wrong guy.
You know, because I know...
three months down the road, they're going to, you know, we didn't budget for something and you need it and all those little bits of amount, you know, people come to you, they want money.
So frugality and of course I'm a product of depression parents.
So you use it, you use it again, you make it do as best you can, you know, and I mean obviously we always spent money.
Howard Perry,
I don't know if you know Howard, but Howard set up my budget the first year, and I ran in the red around April or May, because he had set it up.
Howard was not exactly a spendthrift, bless his heart.
And that's the only year I have ever run in the red.
I have never gone back to the trough.
And even Malin Sutherland has said to me in budget meetings, sometimes I don't totally understand what you're doing, but I trust you.
And to me, that's the best compliment.
All right, with new staff, were there any things that you told them, no, no, no?
In the early years, especially, I said, you need to be aware we're in a conservative environment.
I used to say it euphemistically, I think.
I used to say, you know, I really have no right to know what you're doing in your personal life or to comment or anything like that.
I said, but if you have a sexual preference for ducks, chickens, and pigs, I think you need to keep it off the campus, way off the campus, because that's going to create a problem.
And what you're ultimately going to do is endanger a good service for kids.
You're going to give us a black mark when we don't deserve it.
And so I just said, you know, if there are any personal inclinations you have that are private and are not my business, just don't get them enmeshed in this environment because that's going to harm us.
Don't do it.
In fact, we had an intern right here from A&M who wound up having a relationship with a woman in marriage student housing whose husband was also a client of ours and was...
and was telling another one of our staff that he had a weapon and was aware some guy was fooling around with his wife.
And we knew he had a gun.
And I didn't get involved in people's work, but I called that intern in and I said, hey, I got information.
I said, he's marking your tires.
He's checking your license plate out.
You better cease and desist.
You better cut this out right now.
And that was rare for me.
I remember once the fiscal affairs office called me, somebody from there about a,
I hired the very first African-American staff member in the Division of Student Affairs in 1978 from University of Wisconsin.
And I got a call and apparently a veterinarian in town complained to somebody who they knew in business affairs that she had not paid her veterinary bill.
And the message to me was to put the screws on her.
And I didn't know, I thought I was going against the A&M way in those days,
I explained to the person that that person was coming to work on time, they were doing their professional work properly, and that I didn't feel it was my purview to interact with them on that level and refused to do that.
And I don't know that that got me many points because apparently that system had worked previously on other people, but I felt very strongly that it was not my business.
Could a young professional in the counseling service go on Saturday night and stand out on the street and drink at Northgate?
Could they date an undergraduate student?
Oh, well, undergraduate student client?
That too?
Oh, absolutely.
Oh boy, psychology has come down on that like a hammer.
Even my colleague Dave Drum, who's Director of Counseling and Assistant Vice President, he's told his staff, if you ever have any kind of intimate relationships with a client, I will destroy your career.
Yeah, psychology has been too fraught with that kind of thing.
And boy, on the state level and the national level, oh boy, that's a big no-no and they're taking action big time.
The other thing, because I know faculty, it's like that with dating.
I don't know that I would, unless it became something that was brought to my attention and was casting some kind of a negative aspersion on this counseling center, I don't know.
I probably would talk to the person who was brought to my attention.
I probably would bring them in this office and talk with them very privately about
I've heard this and this is the impact it can have on you and on our service and on our mission.
And I don't know that I'd come out with a direct hammer in the beginning, but I'm sure I would have a conversation if I got it from somebody else.
All right, and let's see, still on guidelines for the staff.
Normally a shirt and tie for the men.
No, normally for the male staff.
Oh, no, I'm sorry.
Yeah, it's just slacks and a nice polo shirt, much probably like I'm dressed today.
The administrative staff I had asked to be in coat and tie because...
We tend to bump into parents more and external individuals.
What about women dress?
Oh, boy.
Oh, my God.
My secretary goes round and round with me.
Sometimes we have dress down in the summer, and I started issuing this very benign thing of just some general limits, and then she started getting me about, well, what about culottes?
And I didn't know a culotte from a whatever.
Oh, my God.
The women, I tend not to deal with them unless there's a dress that's obviously utterly too short or cleavage is going on.
The other thing staff hates about me is I will not, even in the summer, abide by blue jeans.
And in Malan's office and vice president's office, some of the secretarial staff will occasionally wear blue jeans, and that's fine with them.
Yeah, the vice president's office is more liberal than I am.
And I just continue to tell people, while I agree in the dress down thing, nice business casual, quote unquote,
Blue jean is not what reflects a professional service.
People are coming to us for a professional service, and I don't think that looks good.
What about beards, mustaches, and hair length?
I don't worry much about that.
Really don't.
The reason I don't is it's like our staff.
I have probably half of our staff are Republicans and half of them are Democrats.
We have Jewish, Catholic, Protestant.
I have a blind counselor.
I have an African-American, Hispanic.
I have a woman from a PhD from Taiwan.
You know, we got to have a lot of different people here because we've got a lot of different kids now.
And so that's why I don't get caught up in, because you got to have somebody to relate to somebody.
Now, do the students of Asian background, do they seek advice and counseling in about the same per capita percentage as other students?
Let me answer it this way.
We get a good representation of international students
because of the staff member that we have here, Dr. Gisela Lin.
She's from Taiwan, got her PhD at University of Massachusetts.
She runs two different kinds of groups for international students, and she works hand-in-hand with the International Student Services Office, so she gets a lot of referrals.
But interestingly, those groups for Asian students tend to be what we would call more psychoeducational discussion groups.
They're not really deep therapy groups.
They're not for that.
I used to co-lead that group, one of the groups, and we thought we were trying to help the first semester international student here.
They don't come because they're so worried about making the grades.
If you get them after they become more comfortable academically, then they'll come.
But then they want to discuss things like, well, we bring in the Yale leaders here to introduce them to Aggie traditions.
we talk about you know American slang all of those things but it's not it's not like a psychotherapeutic group that's that's not what they're interested in except when she gets them and others of us who relate well to internationals except when you get them on one-on-one then they'll begin to talk about marital discord or something like that yeah and I'm assuming that
faculty and professional staff individuals never came over to get personal counseling themselves.
Well, that was interesting because Clint Phillips, years ago, and I really like Clint, Clint offered me a proposal at one time that if he would buy us a counselor, would we provide counseling services for the faculty?
At that time, I think the faculty numbered 2,500 or something, I don't know, and then
you know, being around for a little while I realized that probably a lot of faculty problems also were family problems and so I multiplied that by a husband and the stereotypical two children and I saw a catchment group of about 10,000 and I said, Clint, I don't, if this really took off, I think we'd get inundated, you know, and
And so that really led to what I thought was much more appropriate was Human Resources Department setting up the EAP, Employee Assistance Program, where they now have one of our former interns, Dr. Anna Satterfield, there.
And she has a staff of people to work with faculty and staff.
That's why we purposely named this place the Student Counseling Service, to make it very clear.
In the early, very early years, we did see a few faculty and staff on a time available basis.
But then we began getting inundated with students.
And then after a while you moved out of the apartment.
Oh, you mean my personal life?
Yeah.
Oh yeah, I married a woman who was an Indiana University graduate.
I met her at an IU picnic in Houston.
And so we dated for over a year and then we got married in the chapel up at Indiana University since that was the common thread we had.
She teaches English to international students in the English Language Institute.
And what did you, and then the two of you, what did y'all do for relaxation?
What did hobbies or avocations or... Fortunately, she loved to play golf, and she really got me re-interested in golf.
So I often kid her that golf is the linchpin of the marriage, you know, and that kind of thing.
In the early years, too, we were involved with a group in the community that gave monthly dinners for international students.
My wife has a fantastic language facility.
She speaks Spanish and French at the drop of a hat and has had good exposure to German, Italian, Portuguese, studied Russian up at Indiana University for two and a half months and then taught for A&M over at Kuriyama and picked up conversational Japanese.
She's a marvel.
She's terrible in history and psychology but wonderful languages.
So those early years, they were really gratifying.
A number of the faculty and
and us got together and gave these dinners for these new international students.
That was very important.
She's always been very involved with professional groups of women in the community and also a major amount of her commitment, she's in a sorority Kappa Alpha Theta,
So she's been on their advisory board and has been the advisor to the treasurer.
And at the same time, I was a chapter advisor to Pi Kappa Phi here for 15 years.
So we had sort of a Greek connection and the Gulf.
And we both enjoy traveling.
So, yeah, those are the main things.
The coming of fraternities and sororities in large numbers, and in fact I'll ask you this trivia question, are you aware that we have a higher percentage per capita of fraternity and sorority members than does UT Austin?
No, I didn't know that.
Theirs are 5% of all undergraduate males and 6% females.
Ours are 6 and 14.
I'll be darned.
We have more fraternity and sorority members than we have core members.
Yeah, that I knew, yeah.
Did the coming of fraternity and sororities in fairly large numbers here have any effect on counseling center's services, more or less?
Oh, you'd get... We'd have those isolated specific incidences where hazing or some kind of abuse or something had happened within the fraternity house or the fraternity...
excuse me, experience.
It was just sort of, but then, you know, gosh, we've had abuse in the English club, you know.
But you get more of it with the Greek groups, and I know them very well from my 15 years.
So it added sort of another dimension, but I wouldn't say some astounding dimension that just totally changed us or anything like that.
It was just the context was different.
Because we get, we hear all the stuff that goes on in the cadet corps too, we get all of that stuff, you know, so it was just a different context.
Right, how has the student, now look at the whole almost 30 years, how has the student body changed?
Well, obviously, the advent of women, which I'll be honest with you, Haskell, I know I have my biases like everybody does, but I don't know that I would have come here if this was all male.
Honestly, I think women add a wonderful dimension.
And the thing that I think is so great is, at this school, is you can walk up to a female student and say, what's your major?
Instead of getting the stereotypical elementary education or sociology,
You get nuclear engineering, you know, and that kind of.
So for a conservative campus, we have women in a lot of non-traditional curricula.
And it's really, really impressive.
Yeah, I think the advent of women has just been one of the great, great things.
The watching the adjustment to the whole Greek thing that you brought in, because I've seen many times the shirts, no frats, you know, and that kind of thing.
That has been an interesting phenomenon, because I know when I was first contacted my fraternity, I really did my best to discourage them.
And I think part of it was not only that I didn't think the conditions were right, but also I think I was sort of respectful and understanding of the cadet corps tradition, and that maybe there should be campuses that are different from other campuses, that that was OK and that was good in a lot of instances.
So the Greek thing has been interesting.
The students coming from more of an urban background, a more sophisticated background over the years has been a change.
Because I did get more of a feel in the early years, for me, 74, you know, the mid-70s.
I saw more cowboy boots and more cowboy hats and more kids, yes sir and no sir and that.
And now they're much more sophisticated people from urban areas.
That's been a change.
Again, I know this is a repeat, but I still, no matter what the former students say, I still think this campus is extraordinarily friendly.
I don't think that's changed.
I think it's astoundingly great.
What about the problems these students are having?
How have those changed?
Yeah.
You know, it's interesting.
You get some universal things that just go on.
They seem to go on forever.
Conflicts with mom and dad, I mentioned before, with roommates.
Great preparation for marriage, by the way.
Boyfriend, girlfriend, or whatever the partner relationship is.
Feeling they're mistreated by a faculty member.
Those anxiety, depression,
suicidal ideation, those things seem to endure, although they've become more intensified.
And then you'll get these little ripples of unique problems, like more recently it's been this whole internet addiction.
We get people who, students who are not
who don't have very good social skills, and just working on the computer and talking with a person without a personal flesh-to-flesh relationship makes them feel very comfortable, and then they get involved in some of these crazy relationships.
Plus, they're not developing their social skills that they ought to.
So you get these blips of things.
I know 10 or 12 years ago we were running for especially women a lot of assertiveness training groups for women to speak up and make their needs known.
And the whole premise of that was
You may not get what you want, but at least you'll feel better about yourself for having asked for it.
And we didn't want to turn out a bunch of hostile people, but we wanted them to assert.
So you get these blips in fads and services, you know, the assertiveness training, and then also you get the internet addiction problem.
But underneath that, you get the same stream of students trying to resolve the parent-child relationship, you know, going from a superior to support relationship to a co-equal adult relationship.
The choice of a life's work always stays universal.
What does it mean to be truly humanly intimate?
And that's where a lot of men and women get, sexuality gets screwed up with human intimacy and there's a difference and they can co-mingle, yes, but there's a difference.
And there's so many things that just seem to stay.
What about drugs and alcohol?
What changes there?
Yeah, definitely much more incidents, greater variety of things to tap into in terms of illicit drugs typically, or even the alcohol and that kind of thing.
And again, no question, every campus in this country that I know of is reporting more serious psychological problems.
No question about it.
Been going up and up and up at distressing levels.
And I'm assuming that those are not necessarily correlated
by grade levels that some of the high-capability students and some of the low?
Oh, yeah, right.
We get referrals, like from the Memorial Student Center, where you get a large core of student leader types.
And we don't get that many referrals.
But when we get them, the students are, it's tougher for them to deal with the problems because they have such heavy responsibility in their student leadership problem.
It exacerbates the basic problem.
that they're having.
You get the average Joe Doe student here who doesn't have that leadership responsibility and it's less stressful, less difficult.
But yeah, I'm not sure that anyone's academic proficiency or socioeconomic status is really an inoculation against
You know, kind of a lot of the mom and apple pie problems.
I mean, to me, conflicts with mom and dad, fights with boyfriend, girlfriend, roommates, to me, that's just life.
That's normal apple pie stuff.
Now, we get some of these marital sleeping around where it's a whole, you know, six couples that you have to ferret it out.
You know, I had a young man in about three months ago who's 6,000 bucks in debt to a bookie.
picked up a former professional athlete with some money who funded him.
And he thought he was good betting.
And he didn't make some good selections.
And he's in debt.
And the bookie is kind of, I don't know if they're going to start with the fingers and toes.
But it's amazing what the students get into.
But the blessing is college students, unquestionably to me, and I'm biased, are the best population to work with.
Because they're bright, they're young, which means they're usually a little more flexible.
and they can get into holes, but they can also dig themselves out very proficiently.
It's a great, I mean, it beats a 60-year-old schizophrenic like I might be over in Austin State Hospital.
You can work with them for years and get nowhere.
Students are great.
Can you share any examples of tragedies where advice didn't work?
I wasn't personally involved in this, but it is virtually, it's almost foolproof.
It's 99% sure that if we get a student
who is talking about suicide or has even made one attempt, it's 99% sure after we get a hold of them they will not try it again.
And in one case, we did have a student who did kill himself.
And I was not the counselor.
It was another staff member.
And that was, frankly, a shock to this whole staff because we just don't lose people once we get them.
And you say that that's one of the places where A&M is, thank goodness, we don't fit the national norm.
Correct.
Yeah.
There are a number of years over my 27 years where we have gotten away with no fatalities, no suicides.
The average is probably one to two, and it's almost always off campus.
They'll be back at home in Houston or Dallas or something like that.
But I know like Farnsworth years ago did a major study of college student suicide, and I don't know if the data still holds true, but
But it was like for every 10,000 students you had, you could expect one to three suicides.
Well, if you extrapolate that to 40,000, we ought to be having 12 to 15 suicides a year.
So A&M has had a wonderfully, of course, one is too many.
One is always too many.
But if you look at it purely statistically, yeah, this campus is, and again, I give a lot of credit just to the environment.
I mean, I think we help, but I think the environment is so important.
What are the events, the rituals, the traditionals, the attitudes here that contribute to that positive?
Yeah.
Well, I think, you know, the phrase from the song, you know, the Aggies are we.
I think just that notion and that bonding from Fish Camp and just the way I think students here and people tend to make people feel included.
Right.
Yale practice, football games, muster.
Oh, yeah.
All add to that.
Yeah, all add to that.
And we know that even in terms of alumni giving,